## Title and authors


Whole Genomes Reveal Evolutionary Relationships and Mechanisms Underlying Gene-Tree Discordance in Neodiprion Sawflies. By Danielle K. Herrig and colleagues. Published in Systematic Biology, 2024.


## Abstract


Rapidly evolving taxa are excellent models for understanding the mechanisms that give rise to biodiversity. However, developing an accurate historical framework for comparative analysis of such lineages remains a challenge due to ubiquitous incomplete lineage sorting (ILS) and introgression. Here, we use a whole-genome alignment, multiple locus-sampling strategies, and summary-tree and single nucleotide polymorphism-based species-tree methods to infer a species tree for eastern North American Neodiprion species, a clade of pine-feeding sawflies (Order: Hymenopteran; Family: Diprionidae). We recovered a well-supported species tree that, except for three uncertain relationships, was robust to different strategies for analyzing whole-genome data. Nevertheless, underlying gene-tree discordance was high. To understand this genealogical variation, we used multiple linear regression to model site concordance factors estimated in 50-kilobase windows as a function of several genomic predictor variables. We found that site concordance factors tended to be higher in regions of the genome with more parsimony-informative sites, fewer singletons, less missing data, lower GC content, more genes, lower recombination rates, and lower D-statistics (less introgression). Together, these results suggest that ILS, introgression, and genotyping error all shape the genomic landscape of gene-tree discordance in Neodiprion. More generally, our findings demonstrate how combining phylogenomic analysis with knowledge of local genomic features can reveal mechanisms that produce topological heterogeneity across genomes.


## Introduction


It has long been recognized that gene trees need not match species trees due to stochastic sorting of ancestral polymorphism (that is, incomplete lineage sorting (ILS)), hybridization and introgression, horizontal gene transfer, and gene duplication and loss. An important implication of gene tree-species tree discordance is that data from many unlinked loci are necessary to accurately reconstruct divergence histories, but large molecular datasets were prohibitively expensive to generate using pre-genomic methodologies. Together, next-generation sequencing and the multi-species coalescent model have revolutionized molecular phylogenetics. Next-generation sequencing made it possible to comprehensively sample the “cloud of gene histories” embedded within a species tree. And by modeling the coalescent process that gives rise to these heterogeneous histories, the multi-species coalescent model can improve species-tree inference. Despite much progress, a central challenge in species-tree analysis is that no model accounts for all possible sources of phylogenetic discordance. So-called “full-likelihood methods” (for example, BEST and *BEAST) accommodate both uncertainty in gene-tree estimation and ILS by simultaneously modeling nucleotide substitution and the coalescent process, but these approaches remain computationally burdensome. In lieu of full-likelihood methods, many researchers use approximate approaches based on the multi-species coalescent model. These methods, sometimes referred to as summary-tree methods, use estimated gene trees for species-tree inference and assume that input gene trees are accurate and that there is no recombination within, but free recombination between loci. These assumptions create a trade-off for sampling loci: shorter loci are more likely to satisfy the “no intralocus recombination” assumption, but less likely to yield sufficient information for accurate gene-tree inference. An alternative to having to define non-recombining loci is to use single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-based methods that assume free recombination between variable sites in the dataset.

Another source of phylogenetic discordance that is widespread in nature is introgression. The multi-species coalescent model has been extended to include interspecific gene flow, but full-likelihood implementations of these models are computationally demanding. For this reason, heuristic approaches for detecting introgression (for example, SNaQ, ABBA-BABA tests, or HyDe) are often used in conjunction with other species-tree methods that assume discordance is due to incomplete lineages sorting. Although no species-tree method accounts for all sources of gene-tree discordance, coalescent-based methods nevertheless appear to perform reasonably well even when model assumptions are violated. In addition to creating new analytical challenges, genome-scale datasets also reveal that phylogenetic discordance is unevenly distributed across the genome. Two potential sources of heterogeneous discordance are genotyping error (for example, due to sequencing, alignment, and genotype-calling errors) and gene-tree estimation error, which may vary across the genome due to local base composition, repetitive sequence content, and the density of phylogenetically informative sites. The genomic landscape of discordance is also likely to be influenced by the interplay between natural selection, gene flow, and recombination. For example, because selection on a locus reduces the effective population size (Ne) at linked neutral sites, regions of the genome evolving under positive or negative selection are expected to have reduced levels of ILS. Because the effects of linked selection are most pronounced in low-recombination and gene-dense regions of the genome, such regions may have reduced phylogenetic discordance via ILS.

Low-recombination regions of the genome may also have reduced rates of introgression. This is because neutral or positively selected variants in low-recombination regions of the genome are more likely to be linked to deleterious alleles that prevent introgression. Overall, research to date suggests that genealogical concordance (that is, the extent to which gene trees match the underlying species tree) should correlate with genomic variables, such as the density of variable sites (parsimony-informative sites and sites for which a rare allele is present on one chromosome only [singletons]), the amount of missing data, gene density, base composition, and recombination rate, that influence the probability of genotyping error, gene-tree estimation error, ILS, and introgression. However, the relative contribution of different genomic predictor variables to genome-wide variation in concordance with the underlying species tree remains an open question.

Here, we revisit a classic case study in messy species-tree inference armed with a high-quality reference genome, whole-genome resequencing data for 19 species, and newer species-tree methods. Specifically, we focus on the eastern North American “Lecontei” clade of Neodiprion sawflies (Order: Hymenoptera, Family: Diprionidae). Previous studies suggest that this clade radiated with gene flow sometime within the last 2 to 10 million years. Upon colonizing eastern North America, population divergence and speciation were likely driven by rapid adaptation to new pine (Pinus) hosts. In addition to variation in host use, there is intra and interspecific variation in larval and adult morphology, behavior, and overwintering strategy. This phenotypic variation, coupled with a rich natural history literature and experimentally tractable species that can be reared and crossed in the lab, makes Neodiprion an excellent model for characterizing both the genetic mechanisms and evolutionary drivers of population differentiation and speciation. For accurate inferences about evolution in this group, an accurate species-tree estimate is essential.

The first informal phylogenetic hypothesis for Neodiprion consisted of 5 named species complexes (lecontei, pinusrigidae, pratti, abbotii, and virginianus) based on shared morphological and ecological traits. Over 50 years later, these proposed species groups were evaluated with DNA sequence data from one mitochondrial locus and 3 nuclear genes. As expected under a scenario of rapid and recent divergence with gene flow, gene-tree topologies differ among the 4 loci. However, gene-tree discordance is especially pronounced between the mitochondrial locus and the three nuclear loci, likely due to extensive mitochondrial introgression. To obtain a species-tree estimate from the remaining three nuclear loci, Linnen and Farrell used multiple species-tree methods. Overall, these analyses yielded consistent support for 2 of Ross’s proposed species groups (lecontei and pinusrigidae), mixed support for the virginianus and pratti species groups, and no support for the abbotii species group. Although different methods and subsets of individuals per species produced different topologies, Linnen and Farrell used areas of agreement across phylogenetic analyses to propose a provisional species tree for the Lecontei group.

In this study, we expand the 4-locus Lecontei-group dataset to the entire genome. Our study has 3 goals. First, we take advantage of a small, tractable genome (approximately 272 megabases) to evaluate how inferred species-tree topologies are influenced by: 1) different analysis methods; specifically, concatenation versus summary-tree (ASTRAL-III) and SNP-based (SVDquartets) species-tree approaches; and 2) subsampling the genome in ways that mimic reduced-representation approaches such as exon capture (approximated by sampling coding exons only) and restriction-associated DNA sequencing (approximated by subsampling SNPs). Second, we integrate all species-tree results to suggest an updated species tree for comparative work, highlighting areas of remaining uncertainty that are sensitive to sampling strategy and species-tree methodology.

Third, we investigate genome-wide variation in concordance, measured using site concordance factors (sCFs), which describe the proportion of “decisive” sites for that are concordant with a focal branch in a reference species-tree topology. Using multiple linear regression, we then evaluate several genomic variables that may predict genealogical concordance. Based on our findings, we highlight priorities for future work on this system and make recommendations for other genome-wide phylogenomic analyses.


## Materials and Methods: Assembly and Annotation of a Reference-Quality Genome for Neodiprion lecontei


DNA extraction and library preparation. We obtained samples for DNA extraction from haploid male siblings that were the progeny of a single virgin N. lecontei female that had been collected in Lexington, KY (38°00ʹ50.4″N 84°30ʹ14.4”W) as a larva and lab-reared to adulthood. To maximize sawfly DNA yields and minimize host plant material in the gut, we flash-froze male larvae that were either in the final, nonfeeding instar or dissected from freshly spun cocoons. We extracted genomic DNA from a single haploid male with a MagAttract HMW DNA Kit (Qiagen, Hilden Germany) using the fresh or frozen tissue protocol. To further improve sample purity, we performed a 2.0 times bead clean-up using polyethylene glycol containing solid-phase reversible immobilization beads solution for each sample. We quantified double-stranded DNA using a dsDNA Broad Range Qubit assay and assessed using the fluorometer feature of a DS‑11 Spectrophotometer and Fluorometer (DeNovix Inc, Wilmington, DE, USA). We quantified DNA purity using the UV-Vis spectrometer feature on the DS‑11, which reported OD 230/260/280 ratios.

We sheared DNA to a mean size distribution of approximately 20 kilobases using a Diagenode Megaruptor 2 according to the manufacturer’s protocol, (Denville, New Jersey, USA) and sized sheared DNA on a Fragment Analyzer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, California, USA) using the High Sensitivity Large Fragment kit. Sheared DNA was the starting input for PacBio SMRTBell library preparation using the SMRTbell Express Template Prep Kit 2.0 according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Pacific Biosciences, Menlo Park, California, USA). The final library was shipped to the USDA-ARS Genomics and Bioinformatics Research Unit in Stoneville, Mississippi, USA where it was sequenced on one Pacific Biosciences 8M SMRT Cell on a Sequel II system (Pacific Biosciences, Menlo Park, California, USA) with a pre-extension time of 2 hours and a movie collection time of 30 hours.

In a parallel pipeline, we prepared an enriched chromosome conformation capture (HiC) library using another N. lecontei sample from the same haploid male family. Briefly, we crosslinked tissue using the Arima HiC low input protocol and performed proximity ligation using the Arima HiC Kit (Arima Genomics, San Diego, California, USA). After proximity ligation, we sheared the DNA using a Diagenode Bioruptor and then size-selected to enrich DNA fragments of 200 to 600 base pairs. We prepared an Illumina library from the sheared and size-selected DNA using the Swift Accel NGS 2S Plus kit (Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, Iowa, USA). The final Illumina HiC library was sequenced on a NovaSeq 6000 at the Hudson Alpha Genome Sequencing Center (Huntsville, Alabama, USA) with paired-end 150 base pairs (PE150) reads. We trimmed sequence reads for Illumina adapter artifacts using the Illumina BaseSpace software (Illumina, San Diego, California, USA).

Genome assembly. Following sequencing, circular consensus sequence (CCS) calling was performed on the raw subreads generated by the Sequel II system using the SMRTLink version 8.0 software (Pacific Biosciences, Menlo Park, California, USA). We filtered the resulting CCS reads for adapter contamination using the software HiFiAdapterFilt version 2.0. The filtered dataset served as input sequences for the HiFi data assembly software HiFiASM version 0.16.1‑r375 using default parameters. We converted the resulting contig assembly (.gfa format) to.fasta format using the software any2fasta (Seeman 2018, a link tseemann/any2fasta).

To produce the HiC scaffolded assembly, we mapped paired Illumina HiC reads to the HiFi derived contig assembly using the mem function of the software BWA. We removed PCR duplicate artifacts from the resulting. sam file using the software samblaster. We then used the resulting.bam file as the input file to the Phase Genomics Matlock suite of HiC functions (Kronenberg and Sullivan 2018, a link. com/phasegenomics/matlock) (Phase Genomics, Seattle, Washington, USA), which converted mapped reads into a HiC format that could be converted to a.hic and.assembly file using the 3d-dna script `run-assembly-visualizer.sh` and visualized using the software Juicebox version 1.11.08. Manual edits to the HiC scaffold assembly were performed using Juicebox version 1.11.08 and changes were applied to the assembly using the Phase Genomics script `juicebox_assembly_converter.py` (a link phasegenomics/juicebox_scripts).

Assembly quality analysis. To estimate genome size, we performed k-mer distribution analysis on the raw data using the k-mer counting software KMC and GenomeScope version 2.0. To evaluate the assembly for duplicate contigs, we performed k-mer spectra analysis with the K-mer Analysis Toolkit (KAT) using the raw data and the contig assembly. We evaluated duplicate content and genome completeness with BUSCO version 5.0 in `genome` mode for the Metazoa, Arthropoda, Insecta, Endopterygota, and Hymenoptera ortholog sets. To characterize the read depth of each contig, we used the mapping software minimap2 with the contig assembly and raw HiFi CCS read set. We used the NCBI nucleotide (nt) database (accessed 2017 to 0605) and the UniProt Reference Proteomes database (accessed 2020‑03) to assign each contig to a taxonomic class using BLAST +  in blastn mode and Diamond in blastx mode, respectively. Results from the hierarchical BUSCO analysis, read depth analysis, and taxon assignment were visualized using BlobTools2, and summarized using the python script blobblurb (a link sheinasim/blobblurb).

Gene annotation. The NCBI Neodiprion lecontei Annotation Release 101 was completed using the NCBI Eukaryotic Genome Annotation Pipeline Software version 9.0. Briefly, BUSCO version 4.1.4 was run in protein mode on the annotated gene set and the longest gene was retained. WindowMasker was used to mask the genome (26.24 percent masked). Previously deposited transcriptome sequences from Neodiprion (including 77 specific tissues isolated from N. lecontei at 5 life stages from Herrig and colleagues 2021), RefSeq proteins, and GenBank Insecta proteins were then aligned to the masked genome using Splign, minimap2, or ProSplign. The alignments were then passed to Gnomon for gene predictions. 14732 genes and pseudogenes were identified in this process including 11969 protein-coding genes.


## Materials and Methods: Taxonomic Sampling, Library Preparation and Sequencing, and Reference-Anchored Alignment


We extracted fresh DNA from ethanol-preserved exemplars from 19 Neodiprion species, often from the same individuals or colonies as used in earlier phylogenetic studies of this genus. Larval individuals had been collected in the United States and Canada (this and all supplementary material can be found in the Dryad data repository: a link) and stored in ethanol at −20 degrees Celsius. Sampling included all species in the eastern North American “Lecontei” clade except N. insularis and N. cubensis, both endemic to Cuba. We included the western North American species N. autumnalis an outgroup. Based on the presence of heterozygous sites in Sanger-sequence data from 3 nuclear loci, all individuals included in this study were diploid.

We dissected tissue from the prolegs and the ventral region of the larvae, avoiding the gut region. We then ground liquid nitrogen-frozen tissue with pestles made from 1-milliliter micropipette tips, and incubated the resulting powder in CTAB buffer with proteinase K and RNase A. We extracted DNA using phenol-chloroform-isoamyl alcohol, dried the ethanol precipitate overnight, and resuspended in TE buffer. We assessed DNA integrity with a 0.7 percent agarose gel, DNA purity with the 260/280 ratio, and DNA concentration with a Quant-iT dsDNA High-Sensitivity fluorescence assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Georgia Genomics and Bioinformatics Core (Athens, GA, USA) prepared and sequenced one small-insert DNA library for each species. Libraries had a mean fragment size of 619 base pairs and were sequenced on Illumina NextSeq 500 with PE150 reads. Sequencing produced 14 to 27 million filtered reads per individual.

To obtain a multi-genome alignment, we used a pseudo-reference-based approach, with our annotated, reference quality N. lecontei genome (described above) serving as the reference. This approach is appropriate for this clade because synteny is high and genetic divergence among species is low (see results). Our pipeline was based on the published Pseudo-It pipeline with some modifications. Briefly, we first used bowtie2 version 2.4.1 to map reads from each species to the N. lecontei reference genome. To allow for divergence between reads and the N. lecontei reference, we initially allowed a mismatch in the seed and “local” mapping options in bowtie2. New variants (excluding indels) were incorporated using samtools version 1.10 and bcftools version 1.10.2. In a second round of mapping, this process was repeated using the first iteration of the genome for each species as the new reference genome. The third round of mapping removed the seed mismatch. The fourth and fifth iterations required end-to-end mapping. After the fifth iteration, we replaced any nucleotide that had a read depth less than 4 or that had excessively high mapping depth (highest 1 percent of depths for each species) with an “N” using a custom script. Heterozygous genotypes were indicated using the IUPAC nucleotide code. Unless otherwise noted, all bioinformatics commands and scripts can be found on Zenodo and the LinnenLab GitHub page under the Herrig_etal_NeodiprionPhylogeny repository.

To calculate genetic distance between species, we used the dist.dna command within the R version 3.6.2 package ape version 5.5 and default parameters to calculate Kimura’s two-parameter (K80) distance between every pair of species.


## Materials and Methods: Dataset Preparation and Phylogenetic Inference


Our genome assembly and pseudo-reference approach produced 20 aligned genomes: the de novo N. lecontei genome and 19 pseudo-reference genomes (18 Lecontei clade species plus outgroup N. autumnalis from the western North American Sertifer group). To explore how genomic sampling strategy and analysis method affects species-tree inference, we sampled the aligned genomes in 3 ways. First, we used bedtools version 2.30.0 to divide the 7 Neodiprion chromosomes into non-overlapping windows of 50 kilobases. To evaluate the effect of window size on species-tree inference, we also generated nonoverlapping windows of 10 kilobases, 100 kilobases, 500 kilobases, and 1000 kilobases. Because some regions of the genome had high levels of missing data, we used custom python scripts to exclude windows for which the amount of missing data (Ns in the alignment) was more than 10 percent. We then used IQ-TREE version 2.2.2.6 to estimate a maximum-likelihood (ML) tree for the entire dataset (concatenated tree) and a gene tree for each window, in both cases allowing IQ-tree to select the best-fit substitution model for each window. We then used the estimated gene trees as input for ASTRAL-III version 5.7.3 to produce a single coalescent-based species tree for each of the windowed datasets. To visualize variation in gene tree topologies among 50-kilobase windows, we used DensiTree version 3.0.2. To prepare gene trees for visualization, the R package ape version 5.7‑1 was used to root trees using N. autumnalis as an outgroup and to standardize branch lengths via the “compute.brlen” command and the “Grafen” method.

Second, to approximate a dataset of protein-coding genes analogous to an RNAseq or exon-capture phylogenomic dataset, we used gffread version 0.11.7 with the-w flag to write FASTA files with spliced exons for each transcript for each species using the NCBI Neodiprion lecontei Annotation Release (iyNeoLeco1.1 RefSeq GCF_021901455.1). Custom scripts were used to define and keep the isoform with the most parsimony informative sites. We again used IQ-TREE to estimate a ML gene tree each gene, excluding genes containing fewer than 10 parsimony-informative sites. Finally, we used ASTRAL-III to estimate a species tree for the protein-coding dataset as described above.

Third, we called SNPs across the entire genome using SNP-sites version 2.5.1. We then filtered the data to exclude SNPs that were absent in more than 10 percent of species and sites with more than two alleles. In addition to analyzing all SNPs (which likely contains tightly linked sites), we produced additional datasets with one SNP sampled every 1 kilobases, 5 kilobases, 10 kilobases, 50 kilobases, or 100 kilobases using SNP-sites, with more sparsely sampled SNPs on par with a dataset that might be generated via RADseq. We transformed each of the six datasets into nexus format and used SVDquartets, implemented in PAUP version 4.0a, to produce a species tree for each dataset. Heterozygous sites were handled using the “Distribute” option.

To generate comparable measures of topological variation among sites for branches in species trees produced by the different methods and datasets, we used IQ-TREE version 2.2.2.6 to generate ML estimates of sCFs for each branch in a focal species tree, using the same alignment used to produce the corresponding species tree (for example, an alignment of SNPs was used for the SVDquartets tree). For methods that use gene trees as input, we also estimated gene concordance factors to quantify topological variation among loci.

IQ-TREE analyses also produced phylogenies with branch lengths scaled to substitutions per site; however, introgression and hemiplasy cause biases in branch length estimation. To correct for these biases and convert branch lengths to coalescent units, we used the function “subs2coal” within the python package HeIST version 0.3.1. This tool redistributes branch lengths based on information from gene- or site-concordance factors. We used our 50-kilobase window phylogeny with sCF values as input, and the resulting tree was visualized using FigTree version 1.4.4.

To evaluate the potential for introgression to contribute to topological variation revealed by DensiTree and concordance-factor analyses, we used the f-branch metric, which detects gene flow among tips as well as internal branches on the phylogeny. To perform this analysis, we first used the “DtriosCombine” function in the Dsuite version 0.4 package to calculate genome-wide f4-ratio statistics for all possible trios of species, with the 50-kilobase ASTRAL-III species-tree as the guide tree. The resulting f4-ratio values were then used as input for the Dsuite command “Fbranch” with default settings. The f-branch statistics were visualized using the “dtools.py” python utility included with the Dsuite package.


## Materials and Methods: Genomic Correlates of Concordance


To quantify how concordance with a focal species tree varies across the genome, we used IQ-TREE version 2.2.2.6 to calculate ML site concordance factor estimates for each internal branch in the species tree for each 50-kilobase window, with the corresponding ASTRAL-III species tree as the focal tree. To visualize how topological concordance varies across the genome for each internal node of the species tree, we used chromPlot version 1.26.0 and colorspace version 2.1‑0 to paint the chromosomes based on observed site concordance factors. All regression and painting analyses were performed in R version 4.3.3 (R Core Team 2024).

For these same 50-kilobase windows, we then generated summary statistics corresponding to the predictor variables in Table 1. First, to describe variation in each 50-kilobase window, we used summaries of the number of parsimony-informative sites and singletons produced in IQ-TREE log files. Second, to quantify missing data for each window, we calculated the proportion of sites in each 50-kilobase alignment that were Ns. Third, to quantify GC content for each window, we calculated the proportion of nucleotides in each alignment that were G or C. Fourth, to calculate gene density for each window, we used the NCBI Neodiprion lecontei Annotation Release 1.1 (iyNeoLeco1.1 RefSeq GCF_021901455.1) to define the number of genes with start codons within each window using custom scripts.

Fifth, to estimate local recombination rate for each window, we used data from a mapping population that was previously used to identify quantitative trait loci for larval color traits that differ between two populations of N. lecontei. The original analysis consisted of 503 SNPs genotyped in 429 F2 haploid males (like all hymenopterans, Neodiprion are haplodiploid) generated via double-digest restriction-associated DNA sequencing. To increase marker density, we first mapped the raw sequencing reads (NCBI BioProject PRJNA434591, SRR6749156) to the new N. lecontei genome assembly (iyNeoLeco1.1). To identify fixed differences between the 2 parental populations, we first mapped reads from the cross parents (4 males; 4 females) and 10 F1 females to the reference genome using BWA-MEM version 0.7.17 with the -M option, followed by samtools version 1.10 to convert the sam output to a bam file. SNPs were called using mpileup in bcftools version 1.9. We then used vcftools version 0.1.16 to remove sites with indels and sites that were missing genotype information for more than 50 percent of the parents. To retain only putative fixed differences between the parent populations, we used vcftools to calculate the FST for each site and a custom python script to retain sites with FST = 1, resulting in 21887 SNPs. To further validate that these SNPs were fixed between populations, we required that at least one of the F1 females was heterozygous and that none of the F1 females were homozygous at a read depth of 10. We used a custom python script to drop any sites that did not meet these criteria, reducing our dataset to 13462 SNPs. We next mapped F2 haploid male reads to the reference genome and called SNPs using BWA, samtools, and bcftools. For genotyping, we required a minimum read depth of 4 at each site and removed sites that had more than 50 percent missing information and that did not pass filtering in parents and F1 females using custom scripts. In total, we retained 3104 ancestry-informative SNPs that were called in at least 50 percent of F2 males.

We used R/qtl to remove sites with identical genotypes to another site, sites exhibiting segregation distortion, and individuals that were missing genotypes at more than 50 percent of markers, producing a final dataset of 1436 markers genotyped in 402 F2 males. Marker location was inferred based on physical location in the reference genome. To estimate a genetic map with positions of markers in centiMorgans (cM), we used the “quickEst” function in ASMap version 1.0‑4, with a Kosambi mapping function. To estimate local recombination rate, we used MareyMap Online with the sliding window option. We then used the recombination rate estimate for the midpoint of each window for our regression analysis.

Our final genomic variable was the D-statistic (or ABBA-BABA statistic), which we calculated for each internal branch for every 50-kilobase window. To calculate this statistic, we used the two site discordance factors (sDF1 and sDF2) produced by IQ-TREE. These values give the percentage of sites within a window that support the two alternative resolutions of a focal branch. Under ILS, these percentages are expected to be roughly equal; strong deviations from this expectation could be produced by gene flow. We calculated D-statistics describing the magnitude of skew in discordant topologies using the following formula: |(sDF1*sN)-(sDF2*sN)/ (sDF1*sN) + (sDF2*sN)|, where sDF1, sDF2, and sN are the two site discordance factors and the number of decisive sites for a particular branch in the species tree.

To determine which genomic summary statistics predicted topological concordance, we fit a linear model for each internal branch in the window-based ASTRAL-III species tree, with all seven summary statistics (number of parsimony-informative sites, number of singletons, proportion missing data, GC content, D-statistic, gene density, and recombination rate) as predictor variables. To ensure all predictor variables were on the same scale, we applied a normal-quantile transformation to each variable prior to fitting the model. To select a model that best explains the data without including unnecessary variables, we used the “step” function in R to perform bi-directional stepwise model selection via the Akaike information criterion. To assess correlations between variables, we used ggplot2 version 3.3.5 and the GGally version 2.1.2 extension to create a scatterplot matrix and estimate Pearson correlation coefficients and p-values.


## Results: Neodiprion De Novo and Pseudo-Reference Genome Assemblies


The N. lecontei iyNeoLeco1.1 assembly was sequenced to 93x coverage of PacBio HiFi reads and produced an assembly size of 272.074 megabases in 106 scaffolds from 168 contigs with only 2 percent of the genome represented in gaps. Additional assembly statistics such as contig and scaffold N/L50 and N/L90 can be found in Supplementary Table S2. Assessment for genome completeness using BUSCOs revealed that for all relevant databases from Eukaryota, Metazoa, Arthropoda, Insecta, Endopterygota, and Hymenoptera, genome completeness estimates ranged from 95.2 percent (Hymenoptera ortholog database version 10) to 99.6 percent (Eukaryota ortholog database version 10). All BUSCOs were found in assembled chromosomes, and none were in unplaced contigs.

For the remaining species, an average of 96.2 percent (range: 93.5 to 97.7 percent) of sequencing reads mapped to the N. lecontei reference genome, resulting in a final average coverage of 20.1x (range: 16x-28x) after removing regions with low or unusually high coverage. The high mapping rates are likely attributable to low overall genetic divergence among eastern North American Neodiprion species: across all species, genome-wide average pairwise genetic distance (K80) was 0.0047 (range: 0.0003 to 0.0093).


## Results: Species-Tree Estimates for Eastern North American Neodiprion


The N. lecontei genome and our 19 reference-based whole-genomes produced a 50-kilobase window dataset, a “gene” dataset, and 6 SNP datasets, summarized in Supplementary Table S6 (all data are available on Dryad a link). For the 50-kilobase window dataset, ML analysis of concatenated data and a summary-tree method (ASTRAL-III) produced identical topologies. We also explored the effect of window-size on ASTRAL-III species-tree estimates and found that windows of size 10-kilobase, 100-kilobase, 500-kilobase, and 1000-kilobase produced topologies identical to the 50-kilobase dataset. An ASTRAL-III tree estimated using 10601 coding loci differed from the 50-kilobase window tree only in the placement of N. compar and N. dubiosus. Finally, a topology produced by our “all SNPs” dataset (that is, 13732,314 SNPs that passed quality and completeness thresholds) differed from both ASTRAL-III trees in the placement of N. dubiosus and the pratti species complex.

We also examined the effect of subsampling SNPs on species-tree inference in SVDquartets. A dataset consisting of SNPs sampled every1 kilobases (212496 SNPs) produced a tree identical to the “all-SNPs” tree. SNPs sampled at 5-kilobase and 10-kilobase intervals (46473 SNPs and 12427 SNPs, respectively) produced a topology that differed from the all-SNPs tree in the placement of the pratti group. Unique topologies were also produced by the most sparsely sampled SNP datasets (1 per 50-kilobase = 5131 SNPs; 1 per 100-kilobase = 2611 SNPs).

Across all species trees (except the smallest SNP dataset), we consistently recovered five primary clades: N. lecontei + N. pinetum (lecontei species complex); N. excitans + N. hetricki + N. pinusrigidae + N. swainei (pinusrigidae species complex); N. maurus + N. pratii + N. taedae (pratti species complex), N. abbotii + N. dubiosus + N. fabricii + N. nigroscutum (abbotii species complex minus N. compar and plus N. dubiosus), and N. knereri + N. merkeli + N. rugifrons + N. virginiana + N. warreni (virginianus complex minus N. dubiosus) (Figure 2 and Supplementary Figure S2). Most of the relationships within these clades were also highly stable across analyses and datasets. However, 3 relationships were sensitive to sampling approach and analysis method: 1) the placement of N. dubiosus within the abbotii clade, 2) the placement of N. compar relative to remaining Lecontei group species, and 3) the placement of the pratti clade relative to the virginianus and abbotii clades. Not surprisingly, these relationships also tended to have the lowest site and gene concordance factors across the trees, regardless of dataset (Figure 2, and Supplementary Figure S2).

To visualize variation in gene-tree topologies, we plotted gene trees estimated from 50-kilobase windows using DensiTree. Consistent with generally low to moderate concordance factors for branches in our species-tree estimates (Figure 2 and Supplementary Figure S2), the DensiTree plot revealed considerable heterogeneity among gene trees. Although heterogeneity is expected under ILS, f-branch statistics reveal evidence of introgression in areas of the tree with especially pronounced site and gene-tree discordance. For example, the highest f-branch scores involve taxa from the virginianus, abbotii, and pratti species complexes (for example, N. rugifrons, N. abbotii, N. nigroscutum, and N. pratti), clades that tend to have lower concordance factors and tend to be more unstable across analyses. Notably, however, there is minimal signal of introgression between N. compar and other species. Thus, the uncertainty in the placement of this species may stem instead from factors that increase ILS.


## Results: Genomic Correlates of Concordance


To quantify concordance across branches in the Neodiprion species tree and across the genome, we extracted site concordance factors for every 50-kilobase window and every branch in the corresponding species tree. To visualize variation in concordance, we painted the chromosomes according to the 50-kilobase site concordance factors for each branch (to improve interpretability, branch lengths are scaled to coalescent units). Consistent with variable genome-wide concordance factors across branches in the 50-kilobase window species tree, this visualization revealed extensive variation in concordance across clades, with some clades having much higher concordance levels on average than others. For each clade, there were also variable levels of site concordance across the genome, with areas of relatively high and low concordance spread fairly evenly across the chromosomes. There were two notable exceptions to this pattern. For some clades, Chromosome 1 or Chromosome 7 (or both) had areas of noticeably more uniform site concordance values compared to the rest of the genome. These areas, denoted by stars in Figure 4, could be explained by inversions that restrict recombination in these genomic locations. Notably, the putative inversion on Chromosome 1 is supported by independent evidence from synteny plots generated from recently produced chromosome-level assemblies for 4 Neodiprion species. Comparable assemblies from additional species are needed to evaluate the putative inversion on Chromosome 7.

To explore factors that give rise to heterogeneous site concordance factors across the genome and species tree, we quantified several genomic predictor variables for each 50-kilobase window. To estimate local recombination rate, we constructed a new genetic map using sequencing reads from a previous cross between N. lecontei populations. By mapping reads to a new reference genome, we nearly tripled the number of markers (from 503 to 1436) and decreased the average spacing between markers from 2.4 cM (maximum spacing = 24.3 cM) to 0.9 cM (maximum spacing = 13.2 cM). The total map length was 1271.6 cM. With an assembled genome size of approximately 272 megabases, this corresponds to a genome-wide recombination rate of 4.68 cM/Mb, a slightly higher rate than was previously reported (3.43 cM/Mb). Plotting genetic distance as a function of physical distance revealed an even coverage of markers across chromosomes; gaps in the new genetic map corresponded to low-recombination centromeric regions. Using these data, local recombination rates were estimated via sliding windows, revealing heterogeneous recombination rates across the genome.

We also investigated pairwise correlations between all genomic predictor variables. The strongest correlation we observed was between the number of parsimony informative sites and the number of singletons. These statistics also correlated positively with the amount of missing data and negatively with GC content and gene count. Recombination rate was positively correlated with missing data, GC content, and gene count.

To determine which genomic variables best predict variation in concordance across the genome for each of the 17 branches in our species tree, we performed stepwise regression for each clade. These regression results are summarized in Figure 5, Supplementary Table S7, and Table 2. To improve interpretability, branch lengths in Figure 5 are scaled to coalescent units. Overall, the amount of variation in site concordance factors explained by our regression models ranged from 3 percent to a 62 percent, with the highest value observed for the clade containing N. pinetum + N. lecontei (notably, the source species for recombination rate and gene density estimates). In general, site concordance factors were highest in 50-kilobase windows with: more parsimony-informative sites, fewer singletons, less missing data, lower GC content, higher D-statistics, more genes, and lower recombination rates. Overall, these findings fit our predictions outlined in Table 1.


## Discussion


Whole-genome datasets provide a comprehensive sample of heterogeneous histories, and the multi-species coalescent provides a framework for modeling sources of heterogeneity. Here, we combine a high-quality reference genome with whole-genome alignments for 20 pine sawfly species to achieve 3 goals: 1) determine the effect of sampling strategy and analysis method on species-tree estimation from whole-genome data, 2) estimate a species tree for eastern North American Neodiprion species, and 3) identify genomic predictors of gene-tree heterogeneity and phylogenetic concordance. Below, we discuss progress on each of our three goals and possible explanations for regression results that deviate from predictions outlined in Table 1, while also highlighting both the broader implications and limitations of our analyses.


## Discussion: Species-Tree Estimates Mostly Robust to Locus-Sampling Strategy and Analysis Method


Although there is growing body of research investigating how marker-sampling strategies and species-tree analysis methods impact the accuracy of species-tree estimates, many outstanding questions remain. In the absence of a consensus for phylogenomic best practices, whole-genome alignments offer an opportunity to investigate how partitioning and analyzing the data in different ways affect species-tree estimates. Based on previous work, f-branch statistics, and the presence of multiple short internal branches in our species tree, both introgression and high levels of ILS complicate species-tree inference in Neodiprion. Nevertheless, our analysis of whole-genome alignments from closely related pine sawfly species revealed that, with a few exceptions, topologies were remarkably robust to marker sampling strategy and species-tree method (Figure 2, Supplementary Figure S2).

We found that a concatenated ML analysis and an ASTRAL-III analysis of ML gene trees for 50-kilobase windows yielded identical topologies. This is perhaps surprising because concatenation is expected to perform particularly poorly when there are many conflicting histories in the dataset. Of course, with 50-kilobase windows, we are almost certainly violating the multi-species coalescent model assumption that gene trees were produced from non-recombining loci. Thus, our 50-kilobase loci are likely to contain many discordant histories, an assumption that is supported by relatively high recombination rates and many windows with low site concordance factors across the genome. However, we also found that our ASTRAL-III results were insensitive to window sizes ranging from 10 kilobases to 1 megabases, demonstrating that varying how badly we violated the “no intra-locus recombination” assumption had little effect on the inferred species tree.

We also found that subsampling coding sequences from the whole-genome dataset, a dataset analogous to one that might be produced from transcriptome sequencing or exome capture, had only a modest effect on the inferred species tree (Figure 2c versus 2b). Compared to the 50-kilobase window dataset, a dataset of 10601 genes (coding sequences only) averaging 3335 base pairs in length differed from the 50-kilobase window species tree in the placement of 2 species (N. compar and N. dubiosus). Although our protein-coding genes are contained within the genomic windows, most of the windowed data consists of intergenic or intronic sequence. Thus, our finding that chromosomal windows (largely non-coding) and genes (coding sequence only) produced slightly different topologies is consistent with previous work that indicates that data type (coding versus non-coding sequence) can influence species-tree estimates. That said, topological conflicts between the 50-kilobase window dataset and the protein-coding dataset for this recently diverged clade were modest in comparison to more striking differences that have been documented in more distantly related taxa (for example, hundreds of millions of years). Thus, the impact of data type on species-tree inference may be dependent on the divergence times of the taxa under study.

Turning to our SNP-based analyses, we found that the largest SNP datasets (all SNPs or 1 SNP sampled every kb) produced topologies that differed from the concatenation and summary-tree analyses only in the placement of N. dubiosus and the pratti complex. For N. compar, the SNP-based analysis recovered the same placement as the summary-tree analysis of coding loci. Although SVDquartets assumes that SNPs are independent, an assumption that is almost certainly violated in our all-SNPS and possibly our 1 kilobases-SNPs datasets, previous work demonstrates that this method performs well even for datasets that include linked sites. Also, the similarity of our SNP tree (assumes free recombination among SNPs) and ASTRAL-III trees (assumes no recombination within loci) further suggests that violating model assumptions about recombination did not have much of an effect on species tree inference for this group of organisms.

We did find, however, that reducing the number of SNPs in our SVDquartets analyses affected our inferred species-tree topology. For the more densely sampled datasets (1 per 1 kilobases, 5 kilobases, and 10 kilobases), topologies differed only in the same 3 relationships that were already unstable across datasets and methods (placements of N. dubiosus, N. compar, and the pratti group). But as the SNP datasets got sparser, we started to recover relationships that differed from all other analyses. For example, the 1 SNP per 50 kilobases dataset recovered a different placement for N. knereri in the virginianus complex. Additional novel (and likely erroneous) relationships were recovered for the 1 SNP per 100 kilobases dataset. Our observation that otherwise robust relationships became increasingly unstable with reduced SNP number is consistent with simulation work demonstrating that under some parameter combinations, large numbers of SNPs may be needed for accurate species-tree inference using this method. Notably, our smaller SNP datasets (approximately 2000 to 5000 SNPs) are on par with those that might be generated via RADseq coupled with choosing a single site per RAD locus. Based on our results and previous studies of the behavior of SVDquartets, phylogenomic studies using RADseq should choose library preparation protocols and filtering strategies that maximize the number of loci and SNPs available for analysis.

While we have explored 2 types of species-tree methods (locus-based and SNP-based) and several different ways of partitioning whole-genome alignments, we have not exhaustively compared all species-tree methods or locus-sampling strategies. For example, data could be further subsampled to mimic other types of phylogenomic datasets that use different types of markers (for example, UCEs). Although our whole-genome alignment would be prohibitive for full-likelihood methods, subsampled data could be analyzed using full-likelihood methods that account for uncertainty in gene-tree estimation, as well as sources of discordance other than ILS. A key question, however, is whether the size of datasets that could be analyzed in a reasonable time frame would be sufficient for the complex models under consideration. Consideration of divergence models that include hybrid species formation, which has been hypothesized for at least one Neodiprion species, may also be informative. Finally, we have analyzed only a single exemplar per species, and previous work on the Lecontei clade (albeit with far fewer loci) suggests that taxon sampling can have a large effect on the inferred species tree. Also, when multiple individuals are sampled per species, a suite of complementary methods can be used to estimate demographic parameters, introgression rates, and population structure that might impact species-tree inference. For these reasons, examining the impact of taxon sampling is also a high priority for future work on the Lecontei species group.


## Discussion: An Updated Lecontei Group Species Tree


Aside from 3 lineages with uncertain placement (N. compar, N. dubiosus, and the pratti species complex), remaining relationships among Lecontei group species were consistently recovered across methods and datasets. Based on these findings, we propose an updated species tree for the Lecontei group, with the three uncertain placements represented as polytomies. Our updated species tree resembles the previous three-locus species tree but recovered an additional Ross species complex (pratti group) and resolved most relationships within species complexes. Both old and new species trees strongly reject the placement of N. compar within the abbotii complex, a relationship that was proposed by Ross based on similar larval coloration and behavior. Based on our results, we propose an updated N. abbotii complex that excludes N. compar.

Despite some uncertainty in the placement of N. dubiosus, our analyses consistently placed this species within the abbotii species group, rendering the virginianus complex polyphyletic and the abbotii complex paraphyletic. Curiously, the previous three-gene species tree, which contained multiple N. dubiosus individuals, consistently placed N. dubiosus within the virginianus species complex and recovered the abbotii complex (minus N. compar) as monophyletic. This discrepancy could simply mean that the whole-genome data enabled us to recover a more accurate species-tree estimate. However, N. dubiosus adults are nearly indistinguishable from N. rugifrons adults, raising the possibility that placement within the abbotii complex in the whole-genome tree is incorrect. For example, it is possible that the N. dubiosus exemplar we chose, which had typical N. dubiosus larval morphology, had an admixed genome due to recent hybridization. We therefore refrain from reassigning N. dubiosus to the abbotii complex until additional samples can be analyzed.

Our updated species-tree also provides the necessary historical framework for investigating the evolution of many different types of life history and morphological traits, such as overwintering strategy, dietary specialization, and larval coloration. However, how this tree should be used depends on whether the goal is to assess phenotypic convergence or genetic convergence. If the goal of an analysis is to assess phenotypic convergence, that is, whether a trait spread to high frequency or fixation independently in two or more lineages following their divergence from a common ancestor, regardless of the genetic underpinnings of those trait changes, then the extensive underlying gene-tree discordance should not impact overall conclusions so long as any resulting uncertainty in the species-tree estimate is taken into account. This can be done, for example, by considering how alternative resolutions of the polytomies in Figure 6 affect conclusions. But if the goal is to evaluate genetic convergence, that is, whether phenotypic convergence is due to independent genetic mutations rather than the same genetic mutation shared via ILS or introgression (hemiplasy), then gene-tree heterogeneity must be considered. One approach for evaluating the probability of genetic convergence versus hemiplasy in the presence of ILS and introgression makes use of species trees with branch lengths scaled to coalescent units (for example, Figure 4, 5). The ultimate test of genetic convergence, however, is to identify the genes and mutations responsible for convergent phenotypes.


## Discussion: Multiple Genomic Variables Predict Site Concordance Factors


Although most clades recovered in our species-tree analyses were robust to sampling and analysis method, there was nevertheless substantial variation in gene-tree topologies and site concordance factors across the genome, a pattern observed in many other taxa that diverged rapidly, often with gene flow. For the most part, variation in site concordance was highly heterogeneous across clades and chromosomes. However, for some clades, chromosome painting revealed unusually homogenous stretches of site concordance factors on Chromosomes 1 and 7. Such patterns could be generated by inversions segregating within and between species that yield more homogeneous phylogenetic histories due to restricted recombination within those regions. In support of this hypothesis, synteny plots for four Neodiprion species revealed independent evidence of the putative Chromosome 1 inversion. Further evaluation of putative inversions and their contribution to observed variation in site concordance factors will require long-read data from additional populations and species.

Our high-quality chromosome-level assembly also provided us with an opportunity to investigate mechanisms that produce gene-tree heterogeneity across the genome. Because several genomic predictors of concordance are correlated, we used a stepwise regression approach to disentangle the contributions of individual variables to local site concordance factors while controlling for other variables. We found that all seven genomic variables predicted windowed site concordance factors, although some of their effects varied depending on the branch under consideration (Figure 5, Table 2, Supplementary Table S7).

We found that both the amount and type of variation, as well as the amount of missing data, contributed to variation in site concordance factors across the genome. For example, we found that site concordance factors tended to increase with the number of parsimony-informative sites (10/14 branch-specific regression models that retained parsimony informative sites revealed a positive relationship; Figure 5, Table 2). Although we had mixed predictions about the number of parsimony informative sites, our regression models suggest that loci with more informative sites tend to yield higher levels of site concordance. In contrast to regression results for parsimony informative sites, and despite positive genome-wide correlations between parsimony informative sites, singletons, and missing data, we found that site concordance factors tended to decrease as the number of singletons and the amount of missing data increased (Figure 5, Table 2). We consider two non-mutually exclusive explanations for these patterns. First, decreased site concordance, increased singleton numbers, and increased missing data in some windows may simply reflect increased genotyping error, which could be caused by genome-wide heterogeneity in alignment error, sequencing error, and read counts. Second, windows with increased levels of variation, that is, more singletons and parsimony informative sites and more indels that would be coded as missing data, may also be explained by reduced positive and negative selection relative to the rest of the genome. Because selection reduces local Ne, such relaxed-selection windows would be expected to have a higher density of discordant sites due to ILS.

We also found that local base composition (GC content) predicted site concordance in 50-kilobase windows. Out of our 17 branch-specific stepwise regression analyses, 14 retained GC-content in the final model, with 10 of these exhibiting the predicted negative relationship between GC content and site concordance factors. These findings are consistent with other phylogenomic datasets that have reported high levels of phylogenetic discordance in GC-rich regions of the genome. One potential explanation for these findings is that repeated bouts of GC-biased gene conversion and compensatory mutations produce high levels of homoplasy. GC-biased gene conversion is expected to be most pronounced in high-recombination regions of the genome. Consistent with patterns in numerous taxa, we found a positive correlation between GC content and recombination rate.

Our regression analyses also support the hypothesis that linked selection, through its effects on ILS, contribute to genome-wide heterogeneity in site concordance factors. Because linked selection reduces local Ne and these effects are most pronounced in low-recombination regions of the genome, ILS should correlate positively, and site concordance factors negatively, with recombination rate. Additionally, because the density of selected sites will be higher in gene-dense regions of the genome, gene density should correlate negatively with ILS and positively with site concordance factors. However, correlations between gene density and recombination rate can potentially obscure these patterns.

Consistent with patterns in several other taxa, we find that gene density and recombination rates, both inferred from N. lecontei, are positively correlated. Nevertheless, the correlation is relatively weak, and our multiple regression models were able to tease apart their independent effects. Out of our 17 branch-specific stepwise regression analyses, 14 retained gene density in the final model, with 12 of these exhibiting the predicted positive relationship between gene density and site concordance factors. For recombination rate, 8 of 12 branch-specific models that included recombination rate had the predicted negative relationship with site concordance factors. When both terms were retained in the final model, gene density tended to have an effect size that was equal or larger in magnitude compared to that of recombination rate, implying that the local density of selected sites might be a better predictor of concordance than local recombination rates. Alternatively, these differences may reflect more accurate estimates of gene density than of local recombination rate (see below). Either way, our regression results are consistent with work in other taxa demonstrating a negative relationship between the intensity of linked selection and discordance via ILS. Like ILS, levels of introgression are likely to vary across the genome. For example, selection against locally maladaptive alleles or genetic incompatibility alleles will reduce introgression in some parts of the genome. To evaluate the contribution of variable introgression across the genome to variation in site concordance factors, we calculated D-statistics for each window for each branch in the species tree. Although these D-statistics were calculated using the same sites that were used to calculate site concordance factors, they are not inherently correlated since D-statistics reflect the magnitude of imbalance between the proportion of sites that support the 2 discordant topologies. In support of this, observed correlation coefficients between windowed site concordance factors and D-statistics for the 17 branches in the species tree were highly variable, ranging between r equals −0.029 and r equals −0.684. We found that windowed D-statistics were retained in all 17 regression models, with all 17 models exhibiting the predicted negative relationship between introgression (D-statistic) and site concordance factors.

Overall, our regression results provide strong evidence that ILS, introgression, genotyping error, and base composition all contribute to gene-tree heterogeneity and variable concordance across the genome. Although previous work and our own results point to biological causes such as ILS and introgression as major sources of gene-tree heterogeneity in recently diverged taxa, our findings suggest that technological error, especially due to variable genotyping error across the genome, should not be discounted. Also, effect sizes in our regression models suggest that the relative importance of these different sources of heterogeneous concordance differ across branches in the species tree.

While our results were mostly consistent with the predictions outlined in Table 1, we did observe some deviations from expected patterns in some of our branch-specific models (Figure 5 Supplementary Table S7, Table 2). Two possible explanations for deviations from predicted relationships for some model terms for some branches are: 1) some branches in the reference species tree used to calculate site concordance factors are incorrect, and 2) N. lecontei-based genomic variable estimates are not applicable to all species in this group. Regarding the second explanation, our estimates for genomic predictor variables came from four main sources: alignments for our 19 focal species (parsimony-informative sites, singletons, missing data, and GC content), site patterns for each branch (D-statistics), annotated genes in the N. lecontei reference genome (gene density), and recombination frequencies from a mapping cross between diverged N. lecontei populations (recombination rate). Of these sources, we expect our multi-species alignments to provide a reasonably accurate gauge of potential genotyping error, overall levels of variation, and base composition for each window. Site patterns were computed for each branch separately. Also, based on synteny plots from available species, we expect gene density estimates from N. lecontei to provide a good approximation of gene densities in the other species. We do not know, however, whether recombination rates estimated from a N. lecontei cross accurately predict recombination rates in other Neodiprion species. Although recombination rate is conserved among some closely related species, it is rapidly evolving in others. It would therefore be worthwhile to estimate recombination rates in additional populations and species to further evaluate the robustness of our conclusions.


## Conclusions


Over 15 years ago, we documented pervasive mitochondrial introgression in Neodiprion involving many members of the eastern Lecontei clade, rendering mitochondrial data unreliable for species-tree inference. A “multi-locus” dataset of three nuclear genes was, unsurprisingly, insufficient for generating a robust species-tree estimate. Here, a whole-genome alignment analyzed with contemporary methods has produced a well-resolved species-tree that, except for three uncertain relationships, is robust to locus-sampling and analysis strategy. Using multiple regression, we found that genotyping error, ILS, and introgression all contribute to heterogeneous phylogenetic signal across the genome. This approach also revealed multiple genomic summary statistics that could be useful for identifying loci that are especially likely to recapitulate or depart from the underlying species tree. Overall, our results demonstrate how combining phylogenomic analysis with high-quality reference genomes, complementary genome feature data, and multiple analysis strategies can not only improve species-tree inference in difficult groups, but also reveal the sources of gene-tree heterogeneity that complicate phylogenetic inference. Similar analyses in additional taxa are needed to determine whether correlates of concordance vary predictably among taxa with different divergence histories. Essential ingredients for these analyses are high-quality, annotated reference genomes, which are increasingly available for non-model organisms.

End of paper.
